---
draft: false
title: Prometheus fully managed open source service | OctaByte.io
meta:
  cover: /images/hosting-and-infrastructure/monitoring/prometheus/screenshot-1.png
  description: Prometheus is a robust monitoring and alerting system, part of the
    Cloud Native Computing Foundation, designed for collecting and storing time-series
    data, querying metrics in real-time, and generating alerts based on user-defined
    conditions.
  keywords: Prometheus monitoring, time-series database, Prometheus query language,
    cloud-native monitoring, system monitoring, alerting toolkit, Grafana integration,
    CNCF projects, Prometheus metrics, time-series data, monitoring tools, DevOps
    monitoring
  breadcrumb:
  - name: Home
    url: /
  - name: Fully managed Open-Source Services
    url: /fully-managed-open-source-services
  - name: Hosting and Infrastructure
    url: /fully-managed-open-source-services/hosting-and-infrastructure
  - name: Monitoring
    url: /fully-managed-open-source-services/hosting-and-infrastructure/monitoring
  - name: Prometheus
    url: /fully-managed-open-source-services/hosting-and-infrastructure/monitoring/prometheus
content:
  id: prometheus
  name: Prometheus
  title: A Powerful Open-Source Monitoring and Alerting Toolkit for Cloud-Native Environments
  logo: /images/hosting-and-infrastructure/monitoring/prometheus/logo.png
  website: https://prometheus.io/
  iframe_website: /website/hosting-and-infrastructure/monitoring/prometheus
  screenshots:
  - /images/hosting-and-infrastructure/monitoring/prometheus/screenshot-1.png
  - /images/hosting-and-infrastructure/monitoring/prometheus/screenshot-2.png
---

## Overview

Prometheus, a Cloud Native Computing Foundation (CNCF) project, is an advanced open-source monitoring system and time-series database designed for collecting, storing, and querying system and service metrics. It allows users to track the performance of applications and infrastructure in cloud-native environments, enabling real-time monitoring, metric aggregation, and alerting. With features such as a powerful query language (PromQL), seamless integration with Grafana for visualization, and a flexible configuration system, Prometheus has become one of the most popular tools in DevOps and SRE (Site Reliability Engineering) for maintaining system reliability and performance.

Prometheus collects data from targets at defined intervals, processes the data through queries, and can trigger alerts if specified conditions are met. It stores all metrics as time-series data and supports a variety of integrations with cloud-native tools. Whether you are monitoring microservices, containers, or virtual machines, Prometheus provides the scalability and flexibility necessary to keep systems running smoothly.

## Features

- ### Data Model

  Prometheus stores data as time-series: streams of timestamped values that belong to the same metric and set of labeled dimensions. This enables precise tracking and analysis of metrics over time, supporting both permanent and temporary time series generated by queries.

- ### PromQL - Powerful Query Language

  Prometheus offers PromQL (Prometheus Query Language), allowing users to query and aggregate time-series data in real-time. With this language, users can perform complex queries to analyze performance and health metrics, view results in tables or graphs, or integrate data into external systems via the HTTP API.

- ### Grafana Support for Data Visualization

  Prometheus seamlessly integrates with Grafana, allowing users to create customizable dashboards for visualizing metrics. Since Grafana version 2.5.0, Prometheus has been a built-in data source, providing a wide range of options for displaying and interpreting data.

- ### Alerting Mechanism

  Prometheus can trigger alerts based on user-defined conditions using its rule evaluation system. Alerts can be configured to notify stakeholders of potential issues or thresholds that need attention, ensuring that critical performance issues are addressed proactively.

- ### Flexible Configuration

  Prometheus offers a versatile configuration system. It can be configured using command-line flags for immutable system parameters and a configuration file for defining scraping jobs, instances, and rule files. This flexibility allows for easy customization and scaling across environments.

- ### Scalability and High Availability

  Prometheus is designed to handle a large scale of metrics collection and query processing, making it suitable for environments with hundreds or thousands of services. It supports high availability configurations, ensuring that monitoring data is always accessible and reliable even in large-scale cloud-native setups.
